# <p align=center> Evaluating the Claim that Rising Ocean Temperatures Are Responsible for Rising Atmospheric Temperatures </p>

<p align=justify> The primary argument being made by the author is that the causal relationship between atmospheric carbon levels and ocean temperatures is being discussed in the wrong order (Rotter, 2021). The article refers to evidence that sea surface temperatures have been rising since early 1900, long before carbon emissions would have had an effect on climate. The main reasoning behind this is that, according to the author, the heat capacity of our oceans is much greater than that of our air, meaning that it is the ocean driving climate rather than the atmosphere. This article is of particular interest to me because one of my greatest climate change-related concerns is its detrimental effects on oceanic ecosystems, ocean food webs, and loss of ocean biodiversity. </p>

<p align=justify> The purpose of this article is to provide an opinion that is contrary to the popular belief that greenhouse gases are largely responsible for the ocean’s warming temperatures. The simplicity of the article makes it relatively effective in pushing this point, as the authors presents their ideas using minimal jargon and intriguing graphs. However, the limited information available online about the author, Charles Rotter, seems to hinder the author’s credibility. His Twitter, @crotter8, projects biased opinions and beliefs. A quick scroll through revealed numerous pro-Trump, anti-AOC and anti-Greta Thunberg tweets, which may lend insight to the limited credibility of his work (for example, Trump quite literally does not believe in climate change) (Twitter, 2021). </p>

<p align=justify> The reliability of the presented claim is also quite restricted, as the author does not cite any peer-reviewed journals or scientific papers to back up their claim. However, the author does reference multiple datasets; namely, HADSST3 global sea surface temp (however, it is from a website called WoodForTrees.org–this site contains credits for data sources; however, the referenced dataset is not listed for credit). This data is depicted in a graph that the author draws various conclusions from, so for these conclusions to be reliable, it would be greatly beneficial for the dataset to be accessible and referenced (this is not the case). However, the general trends in global ocean temperature are accurate (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2016). Published research disagrees with the claim being made, and while ocean heat release may be a factor in the temperature rise seen from 1900 to 1940, other external forces such as greenhouse gas increase, reduction in stratospheric aerosols from volcanic activity and cloud change, are all likely contributors to this trend (Hegerl et al., 2018, p.20). Other models suggest that these external forcings contribute less than 20% to the mean warming of the early 20th century, while 50% of the global warming is caused by increase in well-mixed greenhouse gases; namely, C<sub>2</sub>, CH<sub>4</sub>, and N<sub>2</sub>O (Egorova et al., 2018). The author is correct in his claim that the ocean has a much greater heat capacity than the atmosphere; however, the author failed to discuss the atmospheric increase in temperature during this same time period. The early 20th century warming was by no means isolated to oceanic warming, as the warming between the ocean and atmosphere are largely intertwined and related. The causes of the Early Twentieth Century Warming (ETCW) period are still largely unknown, but there were simply too many climate-altering events that occurred to pinpoint the warming period simply to rising ocean temperatures (which the author also fails to expand on causes to this). Overall, it is evident that although the author attempts to support his belief using a dataset, they fail to support this theory with rigorous, scientifically credible research and fail to acknowledge the limitations within the currently available scientific literature, as the causes of the ETCW are still largely unknown. Rather than acknowledging this, the author incites doubt and uses irrelevant facts to support his own beliefs. </p> 

### References
Egorova, T., Rozanov, E., Arsenovic, P., Peter, T. and Schmutz, W., 2018. Contributions of Natural and Anthropogenic Forcing Agents to the Early 20th Century Warming. Frontiers in Earth Science, [online] 6. Available at: <https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/feart.2018.00206/full> [Accessed 13 Feb. 2021].

Hegerl, G.C., Brönnimann, S., Schurer, A. and Cowan, T., 2018. The early 20th century warming: Anomalies, causes, and consequences. WIREs Climate Change, 9(4), p.e522.

Rotter, C., 2021. The Ocean Warming Enigma. [online] Watts Up With That? Available at: <https://wattsupwiththat.com/2021/01/16/the-ocean-warming-enigma/> [Accessed 12 Feb. 2021].

Twitter, 2021. Charles Richard (@crotter8) | Twitter. [online] Twitter. Available at: <https://twitter.com/crotter8?lang=en> [Accessed 13 Feb 2021].

United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2016. Climate Change Indicators: Sea Surface Temperature. [Reports and Assessments] US EPA. Available at: <https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-sea-surface-temperature> [Accessed 13 Feb. 2021].

